You are listening to the Airline
Selection Podcast where we bring you
insights to help you succeed at airline
selections. This podcast is brought to
you by Airline Selection Program. Please
welcome your host, airline captain and
major airline recruiter, Guom Debushe.
[music]
Hi D, it's nice to see you again. So
what are we going to talk about today?
>> Hi GM, it's nice to see you too. So
today a topic that I brought for you is
well it's still connected to the pilot
superpower u package that we are doing
now. Okay. And I was thinking that today
we can talk about confidence and
overconfidence. What do you think about
that?
>> Yeah, good. Good. I'm confident that
this is a good topic.
>> Hopefully not too overconfident. Yes.
Okay.
All right. Uh, so yeah. Would you like
to introduce to our viewers what
confidence and overconfidence is or
should I do it?
>> Um, well, since you you you're you're
offering it to me. Well, I think being
confident is um is directly linked to
your competence. First of all, if you've
studied, if you've prepared, and it's
true for everything in life, you you are
more likely to be confident. there's a
direct connection between the two. Um,
of course, there is also a psych um, a
personality trait behind that. Some
people tend to be confident or others on
the other end of the scale of this one
personality factor can be more anxious.
They are less confident in we're talking
about trusting yourself here about
confidence about themselves. And then
there was sorry and then there was the
matter of overconfidence. So someone who
is very anxious, they don't trust
themselves, if that's a personality
trait that they have.
>> Well, of course, this is becoming a
problem after a while, okay? Because
even though if they study, they still
don't trust themselves. This is the
person then when they leave their house,
they go back up three times to make sure
that the door is locked. You know,
that's that's not okay. You're not going
to be able to dispatch the plane like
that or you're going to feel emotionally
terrible if you if you do. And then at
the other end of the scale, there is the
person who is too confident,
overconfident. This is your your
maverick, so to say, right? This is the
the person that even though the
weather's bad and they still going to
take minimum fuel or they they're just
not going to pay too much attention to a
situation that's not great because it
was okay last time and don't worry, it
will be fine. This is a very dangerous
be behavior linked also in some cases on
a more technical tactical standpoint to
confirmation bias. But this this these
are dangerous behaviors. So what's
important is to be confident I would say
more on the confident side than the
anxious side but not to be
overconfident. And if you have signs in
yourself that you're overconfident it's
likely the psychologist is going to see
it as a problem. Of course, if you have
also anxiety, which could be clinical,
even if it's extreme, this is going to
be a problem. Okay? So, confidence is
expected. Doubt is also healthy. We need
both because if you don't feel it, uh if
you're not sure whether you got the
takeoff clearance or not, you got to
query it. Okay?
>> So, you need a healthy amount. So I
would say on a scale of 1 to 10 and
that's what we've worked out with um our
psychologist and the 16PF well the 16PF
psychologist that have helped us
modilize the pilot role to the extent
that we know it today is ideally you
want someone who's between sort of three
and five or six. So three being quite
confident but not too confident and
doesn't get too far in the anxiety.
Okay, that's the ideal uh portion. If
you want to know more about that, come
into advanced interview course because
don't worry, it's not because you're
seven anxious that that you can't be a
pilot. No, it would have to combine with
something else and then maybe we're
going to have a discussion. Okay. So, I
think I took a lot of your introduction,
Donna. So, why don't you continue?
>> No worries. No worries. Now, maybe we
can just summarize uh the difference
between competence and overcompetence.
Um just to make it a bit clearer. Um I
would say that yeah confidence is
definitely as you explained a realistic
belief in your abilities that is added
on top of uh of competence and then
overconfidence would be I would call it
maybe a cognitive distortion when you
overestimate your own abilities
>> and actually there is something that was
connected here that I would want uh to
introduce it's well the name is not very
important but it's called the Dunning
Krueger effect which is when people with
the no ability in a certain topic they
overestimate their uh competence because
they just lack the awareness or the
knowledge to recognize where they are at
that certain um at that certain level so
that they don't recognize their own
mistakes.
>> Okay. And then another quite interesting
thing that I think um we
we also fall into that sometimes is when
we believe that we are better than the
average although of course statistically
it doesn't make sense everyone to be um
above the average. So
>> yeah because if everybody thinks they're
above average then then then the average
makes no sense. That's what you mean,
right? Yeah. Of course. Yeah.
>> Yeah. Yeah. Exactly. Exactly. So of
course that when you are just starting
out with your career then sometimes you
can feel like an impostor maybe like
okay I I've studied hard to to be here
but maybe it still feels like um that
you're a little bit out of place. Of
course you have to get used to uh being
on the flight deck and um just gather
some experience but um
>> imposter imposter syndrome is something
we all face and it's very very active
during selections this imposter syndrome
>> you you arrive there you worked and
somehow you feel almost it could be even
in the in the waiting room going like
have I fooled myself into this and are
they going to to see this this sort
strange. So, well, you're right there,
right next to the finish line. You've
got these thoughts that can creep into
your mind or they could creep into your
mind the day before and you can't really
control it when that happens. I've I've
had that happen. Um, and well, just know
that it happens to everybody as they're
about to reach a huge goal that they
would sort of pull the whole structure
they've built over their own head
because of this. So, don't let this
happen to you. to just, you know, just
try and remember why you did this, that
you've worked hard, you've earned your
seat, you belong in the on on this
interview chair, you know, and and you
belong in this airline. Uh, and that's
but know that it is normal. And if you
feel a strong imposter syndrome, I would
say several weeks before maybe Dana, get
in contact with Dana or any psychologist
that can help you work through it
because it's not it shouldn't be a big
deal
>> to to to work through that. Yeah. And
something uh that I want to mention here
is that a lot of people do tell me that
yeah well how do I how do I become
confident because they are waiting for a
certain feeling. They want to feel
confident to start doing something
>> and I always tell them that well
confidence is not a feeling. I would
like to put it in a way that confidence
is more of an act of putting yourself
out there and trying.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. In a way it's earned. you earn it.
>> Maybe maybe you have it inside of you,
but then you could quickly get
overconfident.
>> Uh but you know, you earn your
confidence. You work and you get
results. That's the that's the idea.
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. Exactly. And I wanted to ask you
about Okay. Well, first you still have
to gather some confidence, but then what
are the ways how can you keep yourself
from becoming overconfident?
>> Well, again, it's about this meta
attention. Um, and about, you know, this
meta attention, having a little bit of
yourself outside yourself, having a
little bit of of yourself outside your
head and in your body to feel. If you
don't feel the doubt because you're too
much in your head, then you don't feel
the emotion, the physical symptoms of
the doubt, which normally there's a
little pit in your stomach that tells
you something's wrong, something's off.
I don't know what it is. Let's just stop
this. Okay, we've forgotten something. I
don't know what it is, but okay, this
this this is very healthy. So listening
to your body, listening to your emotions
is very helpful. Um there's a reason why
we have these emotions and actually I'll
give you a tip here. Um
this is a great way to answer the
question at the interview of what makes
you doubt. Are you someone who doubts a
lot is another way that you could phrase
it. When was the last time you doubted?
Well, here sometimes at the interview
it's worth instead of answering directly
on this one to give a bit of a
masterclass on some CRM concept. uh you
could do do this in this instance. So
you could this is particularly fit when
they want to find out your relationship
with SOPs that you can reassure them of
the fact that they are necessary but
sometimes they don't work. Well here
it's the same thing. You could say well
you know uh say they ask
um what makes you doubt you say well
doubt is a very healthy uh emotion. It's
here for a reason. So what makes me
doubt? Well is when they have the
symptom of the doubt I would clear that
doubt. If there's a doubt, there's no
doubt. We often say, meaning if there's
a doubt, there's no doubt. We're gonna
have to clear that doubt. It's here for
a reason. It's very safe. So, I think
I'm someone when I work, I get results,
but when I doubt, I tend to double
check. That's it. You see, that's that's
a really nice, elegant way to answer.
And you can see on this one how people
could very quickly stumble upon
themselves and start to say things they
shouldn't be saying, like a terrible
doubt that they had or an mistake that
they made. Don't go there. Okay? So,
Yeah. I don't know if I've answered your
question.
>> Yeah. Yeah, you actually did because uh
yeah, it's a it's a very nice way that
you put it. And um something that
connects here is um well, we have also
put this small image in the article
where we have um discussed how do you
build that confidence and what is
included in that. And then here we have
um we have talked about three different
things. One is competence, then there's
calibration and then curiosities. These
three C's so-called. Um so if I can tell
you a little bit more about that and I'm
very curious what you uh what you could
add to this is that of course as you
have mentioned you have to have the
competence to um to give yourself a good
foundation of um being confident because
if you have the technical knowledge or
any other kind of knowledge that you
have to have to be a pilot this just
gives you the belief that you can do it
because I think a lot of people believe
that okay maybe I just got lucky I got
this uh right this one time. But if you
prove yourself over and over again, you
will believe that okay I have this
confidence I can do it. Um so that you
can go on with your life in uh in a way
how you can build yourself up from
there. And of course then we have the
calibration part which is about when you
know your limits when you know how what
what is it that you don't know when is
the time to ask for help.
>> Okay.
>> And I think you mentioned something
about that.
>> Um well yeah I think we we talked about
in a couple of episodes back you know
when when there's you know that you sort
of something happens and it is not of in
your main area of competence. you know,
some captains are and some co-pilots are
better at some things than at others,
you know. So, some people will will know
the books extremely well, but um maybe
there's a
technical area, maybe they're they're
not the best at understanding
performance in the most detailed way.
Some people will be good at manual
handling. Some people will be better at
managing the autopilot when things get
really complex and when the weather's
really bad, for instance. you know,
everybody's got their little area of of
competency and uh and of interest as
well. Very simply, you know, I I really
enjoyed um I thought because my handling
skills, I was an instructor, you know,
on light aircraft, so my handling
handling's always been something that I
thought I I was I was good at and I
thought that the autopilot because
autopilot is quite complex. Even though
these machines that I flew were, you
know, the 320 was an end of 1980 and the
trip 7 beginning of 1990, there were a
lot of intricacies on this autopilot
that could catch you and if they catch
you on the day when you really need it,
meaning that the weather's bad, this is
when things could happen. So, I always
found that that um um you know, really
understanding all the intricacies of the
autopilot was something that I could
always progress on. This it was kind of
my my area of strength.
Um,
so I had areas where perhaps I was not
as strong as others who would fly visual
approaches all the time. Yeah, visual
approaches was was something I could do,
but I I I didn't do very many of them.
First of all, at my second airline, it
was um something that you wouldn't do
unless there was a clear reason why you
would do it. And at British Airways, it
was allowed. But again because they
found there was so many air safety
reports on them they it was sort of just
try and stick with the instrument
approach basically. So it's something
but I know my my cousin who's at Air
France for instance he he they fly
visually they do visual approaches a lot
more also because they go to
destinations that are a bit more prone
they go to a little bit well he was
telling me when they go to Martineique
and stuff they do that quite a lot on
the islands. So anyway, he's better at
that than I am, no doubt. And maybe my
knowledge on the autopilot was a bit
more of my area of specialtity compared
to to to him for for instance. I don't
know. I'm he's he's very good on the
autopilot, too. I know. I'm just saying.
>> Yeah.
>> Everybody's got their little area. Okay.
So,
>> um
>> Yeah, exactly. So you would you you'd
know for in his case u if the weather's
really bad and he's getting into an area
which is going to mean that he's going
to need to use the autopilot and see the
runway at the very end. Say it's a
complex arnab approach and he's not
practiced that as much. Well, this is
where he would know that he could come
close to his limit. In my case, if I had
to do a visual approach and I've not
done one for two years, well, I know
that this is an area where I'm going to
approach my limits. You see, because
I've not done it I've done it a long
long time ago. So, I'm going to have to
rethink of how I'm going to do it. And
I'm probably going to do some sort of a
hybrid thing when I'm going to use the
the autopilot's guidance to fly
visually. This is probably what I'm
going to do so that I don't miscalculate
because my eye is not calibrated anymore
to as well as it used to be. very simply
>> let's be honest. So
>> now in all honesty I last time I I flew
a visual approach was in I think it was
in 2004.
So I flew my whole career at B at B at
Emirates without flying a single one.
>> Oh okay.
>> Interesting. And my cousin he tells me
he does them all the time. So
>> yeah.
>> Yeah. Well that's the thing. We all have
our uh well these different procedures
and also what are we good at and just
knowing your limits is uh not only good
for knowing when to ask for help but as
you said to when it when it's time for
you to refresh you
>> sorry excuse me refresh your knowledge.
I think I talked too much today.
>> Yeah. Yeah. I mean when you prepare for
a flight you know what's likely to
happen. Okay. So you you know you might
want to you're going to need to refresh
yourself on this airport on the
procedures that are likely to happen
>> on you know well typically if the
weather's not great
>> you're going to start to think of your
plan B or plan C and how you're going to
execute that and what happens if you get
a failure at this point at that point
you're going to think about all this
stuff so yeah you you definitely need to
to prepare so that you um
so you arrive confident. Yeah, exactly.
But this was only our second step in our
little pyramid because at the top I
think what stands is curiosity and
curiosity it just it makes you open uh
for learning so that it prevents this
stagnation and complacency
>> and it definitely adds to the growth
mindset because well you don't want to
be stuck in uh the position where you
are now but you just have the
willingness to uh to be open to whatever
comes your
and how you can be better how you can be
a better pilot but also a better human
being.
>> Yeah, absolutely. Um being curious is is
important. Um I I often I think I
started doing that at BA after I took
the advice of a captain who told me if
something happens on your flight on a
flight anything maybe you have an MEL
about an electrical system that's not
working so we have we we take off you
know with with with a failure that's
allowed and well that's an opportunity
in the cruise to read about that system
you know if something happened there was
a sick passenger maybe and we have to
offload their bags um and get them the
medical care they need maybe it's the
time in the cruise later on on that day
You're going to take a look at
everything in the manual that relates to
that and maybe look also at the cabin
crew manual to see what they have been
doing. So you get a better understanding
getting curious. If you have a very
strong knowledge base, your path to a
good decision is less steep. If you have
a very small knowledge, the path to a
good decision is very steep.
>> Okay, that's an interesting concept.
>> Yeah. Yeah, definitely. Well, um these
were all my questions for you today. I
don't know if you would like
>> Yeah, I I'd like to add something as
well is that they um you know the a lot
of people wonder why pilots go into the
sim every six months when actually
surgeons who also have people's lives in
their hands don't. I honestly think that
they should somehow but um in aviation
the way the way the reason that it's
like that is because we want people to
always be safe. Okay. So um you go to
the sim and then you work work work work
work work and at at Emirates there was
quite a lot of pressure before the sims
you'd work for almost a month and then
what you do when you work you refresh a
lot of your knowledge you you learn
things specific to the exercise but that
gets you to study a lot of things in the
books and you arrive at the sim with
your knowledge at the best that it can
be and then during the next six months
the knowledge will go down but you gain
experience of course throughout that
period as well but sorry like this you
gain experience and come a point your
knowledge has gone down a bit. Okay, of
course you've picked up because flights
happened but that's what happens but
it's always above the line knowledge
wise and then you go back to the sim and
you start again. Well, let's move my
hand here on the screen and and they
back here and then you go down. So in
fact your your knowledge always goes
like like this on a six months sort of
thing and then after that if you get
your upgrade you're going to work a lot
and boom, you're gonna do a jump and if
you become an instructor again you're
going to do a jump. you change change
machines, well, you learn a new machine.
But it's interesting to to understand
that. And if something happens on a
flight, then again, you're going to do a
jump because you're going to study what
happened. You're going to try and
improve, make sure that it doesn't
happen again, rebound from something
that was not as optimal as you would
have liked. Um, but I thought I thought
that was interesting to to mention as
well that your knowledge is not always
you're not always studying the books.
Come a point. You need to live your life
and experience your profession.
with spontaneity, you know, and then
there's a time to be back in the books.
And but don't worry, uh even if the you
don't have a SIM check every you only
have a SIM check every six months, the
company sends so much material, so many
newsletters, so many reminders, so many
new procedures that come out, notices
from the manufacturer that you're always
sort of learning at some point.
>> Yeah.
>> Well, thank you for this uh for this
information.
>> Excellent. All right. Well, um, nice to
talk with you, Donna, and I'll see you
in the next episode. Thank you.
>> All right. Can't wait. See you.
>> Bye-bye, everybody. Bye.
>> This podcast was brought to you by
Airline Selection Program, a company
that is focused on helping you succeed
at airline selections. Our flagship
course, Advanced Interview Course, has
helped hundreds of pilots just like you
become successful. Visit our website at
online.airines selectionprogram.com
and find out how you too can get the job
of your dreams.